.Dd April 13, 2010
.Dt FEH 1
.Os
.
.Sh NAME
.Nm feh
.Nd image viewer and cataloguer
.
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Ar options
.Ar
.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is an image viewer using the imlib2 library to open and manipulate
images.  It has a large number of operational modes.  The default mode is an
image slideshow, showing one image at a time from those specified on the
command line.  Keys and mouse control may be used to move through them.
Other modes can be specified on the commandline, and are described below.
.Pp
.Nm
can also recurse through a directory structure to form a filelist for
processing, and will convert directory names on the commandline into a list
of their contents automatically.
.Pp
Filelists can be sorted in a number of ways.  The default is the order in
which the files were specified on the commandline, or the order in which they
were read from the disk.  You can specify sorting modes such as randomize
or you can sort by filename, image name, width, height, pixels, etc.
Filelists can also be saved to or loaded from files.
.
.Sh MODES
Montage mode forms a montage from the filelist.  The resulting image can be
viewed or saved, and its size can be limited by height, width or both.
.Pp
Collage mode is very similar to montage mode, except the images are distributed
randomly and may overlap each other.
.Pp
Index mode forms an index print from the filelist.  Image thumbnails are shown
along with the filename, filesize and pixel size, printed using a truetype
font of your choice.  The resulting image can be viewed or saved, and its size
can be limited by height, width or both.
.Pp
Thumbnail mode is like index mode, but the mini-images are clickable and open
the selected image in a new window.
.Pp
Multiwindow mode shows images in multiple windows, instead of as a slideshow
in one window.  Don't use with a large filelist ;)
.Pp
Fullscreen mode shows images in fullscreen view.  Can be combined with a
slide-change delay to show an automated presentation.
.Pp
List mode doesn't display images.  Outputs an
.Cm ls - No style
listing of the files in the filelist, including image info such as size,
pixels, type, etc.  Customlist mode will display whatever image info you want,
in the format you choose.
.Pp
.Nm
can also list either all the loadable files in a filelist or all the
unloadable files.  Useful for preening a directory.
.Pp
.Nm
also has the ability to load files via http or ftp, simply specify the url on
the commandline.
.Pp
.Nm
can read options from the commandline, or from a config file.  The syntax is
the same in each case.  See
.Sx CONFIG FILE SYNTAX
for details about using themes defined in a config file.
These methods may be used in conjunction.
.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Cm -h , --help
display help output and exit.
.It Cm -v , --version
output version information and exit.
.It Cm -V , --verbose
output useful information, progress bars, etc.
.It Cm -q , --quiet
Don't report non-fatal errors for failed loads.  Verbose and quiet modes are
not mutually exclusive, the first controls informational messages, the second
only errors.
.It Cm -T , --theme Ar theme
Load options from config file with name
.Ar theme
- see
.Sx CONFIG FILE SYNTAX
for more info.  Note that options from the theme file always override
commandline options.
.It Cm -_ , --rcfile Ar file
Use
.Ar file
to parse themes and options from, instead of the default
.Pa ~/.fehrc , /etc/fehrc
files.
.It Cm -r , --recursive
Recursively expand any directories in the commandline arguments
to the content of those directories, all the way down to the bottom level.
.It Cm --no-jump-on-resort
Don't jump to the first image after resorting the filelist.
.It Cm -z , --randomize
When viewing multiple files in a slideshow, randomize the file list before
displaying.
.It Cm -f , --filelist Ar file
This option is similar to the playlists used by music software.  If
.Ar file
exists, it will be read for a list of files to load, in the order they appear.
The format is a list of image filenames, absolute or relative to the current
directory, one filename per line.  If
.Ar file
doesn't exist, it will be created from the internal filelist at the end of a
viewing session.  This is best used to store the results of complex sorts
.Pq Cm -Spixels No for example
for later viewing.  Any changes to the internal filelist
.Pq such as deleting a file or it being pruned for being unloadable
will be saved to
.Ar file
when
.Nm
exits.  You can add files to filelists by specifying them on the commandline
when also specifying the list.
.It Cm -| , --start-at Ar position
Start at
.Ar position
in the filelist.
.It Cm -p , --preload
Preload images.  This doesn't mean hold them in RAM, it means run through
them and eliminate unloadable images first.  Otherwise they will be removed
as you flick through.  This also analyses the images to get data for use in
sorting, such as pixel size, type etc.  A preload run will be automatically
performed if you specify one of these sort modes.
.It Cm -F , --full-screen
Make the window fullscreen.
.It Cm -g , --geometry Ar width No x Ar height
Limit (and don't change) the window size.  Takes an X-style geometry
.Ar string
like 640x480.
Note that larger images will be zoomed out to fit but you can see them at 1:1
by clicking the zoom button.
.It Cm -. , --scale-down
When not in fullscreen: Scale images to screen size if they are too big.
.It Cm -Z , --auto-zoom
Zoom pictures to screen size in fullscreen
.Pq affected by Cm --stretch No and Cm --ignore-aspect .
.It Cm --zoom Ar percent
Zoom images by
.Ar percent
when in full screen mode or when window geometry is fixed.  When combined with
.Cm --auto-zoom ,
zooming will be limited to the specified
.Ar percent .
.It Cm -w , --multiwindow
Disable slideshow mode.  With this setting, instead of opening multiple files
in slideshow mode, multiple windows will be opened; one per file.
.It Cm -x , --borderless
Create borderless windows.
.It Cm -d , --draw-filename
Draw the filename at the top-left of the image.
.It Cm -D , --slideshow-delay Ar float
For slideshow mode, wait
.Ar float
seconds between automatically changing slides.  Useful for presentations.
.It Cm --cycle-once
Exit feh after one loop through the slideshow.
.It Cm -R , --reload Ar int
Reload images after
.Ar int
seconds.  Mainly useful when viewing webcams via http.
.It Cm -k , --keep-http
When viewing files using HTTP,
.Nm
normally deletes the local copies after viewing, or, if caching, on exit.
This option prevents this so that you get to keep the local copies.
They will be in
.Pa /tmp
with
.Qq Nm
in the name.
.It Cm -j , --output-dir Ar directory
Save files to
.Ar directory
.Pq only useful with -k
.It Cm -Q , --builtin
Use builtin HTTP client to grab remote files instead of
.Xr wget 1 .
.It Cm -G , --wget-timestamp
Don't add a timestamp
.Pq Qq ?1234
to URLs when (re)loading them.
.It Cm --caption-path Ar path
Path to directory containing image captions.  This turns on caption viewing,
and if captions are found in
.Ar path ,
which is relative to the directory of each image, they are overlayed on the
displayed image.  E.g. with caption path
.Qq captions/ ,
and viewing image
.Qq images/foo.jpg ,
the caption will be looked for in
.Qq images/captions/foo.jpg.txt .
.It Cm -l , --list
Don't display images.  Analyse them and display an
.Xr ls 1 - No style
listing.  Useful in scripts to hunt out images of a certain
size/resolution/type etc.
.It Cm -L , --customlist Ar format
Use
.Ar format
.Pq printf-like string containing image info specifiers
for list output.  See
.Sx FORMAT SPECIFIERS .
.It Cm -U , --loadable
Don't display images.  Just print out their names if imlib2 can successfully
load them.
.It Cm -u , --unloadable
Don't display images.  Just print out their names if imlib2 can NOT
successfully load them.
.It Cm -S , --sort Ar sort_type
The file list may be sorted according to image parameters.  Allowed sort
types are: name, filename, width, height, pixels, size, format.  For sort
modes other than name or filename, a preload run will be necessary,
causing a delay proportional to the number of images in the list.
.It Cm -n , --reverse
Reverse the sort order.  Use this to invert the order of the filelist.
E.g. to sort in reverse width order, use
.Cm -nSwidth .
.It Cm -A , --action Ar action
Specify a string as an action to perform on the image.  In slideshow or
multiwindow modes, the action will be run when the enter key is pressed, in
list mode, the action will be run for each file listed.  In
loadables/unloadables mode, the action will be run for each
loadable/unloadable file, respectively.
The action will be executed by /bin/sh.  Use format specifiers to refer to
image info.  See
.Sx FORMAT SPECIFIERS
for examples.  E.g.
.Qq feh -A "mv ~/images/%n" * .
In slideshow mode, the next image will be shown after running the action, in
multiwindow mode, the window will be closed.
.It Cm --action1 No .. Cm --action9
Extra actions which can be set and triggered using the appropiate number key.
.It Cm --draw-actions
Draw the defined actions and what they do at the top-left of the image.
.It Cm -m , --montage
Enable montage mode.  Montage mode creates a new image consisting of a grid of
thumbnails of the images in the filelist.  When montage mode is selected,
certain other options become available.  See
.Sx MONTAGE MODE OPTIONS .
.It Cm -c , --collage
Enable collage mode.  Collage mode is very similar to montage mode, except
the images are distributed randomly.
When using collage mode, you should also specify
.Cm --limit-width
and
.Cm --limit-height .
.It Cm -i , --index
Enable Index mode.  Index mode is similar to montage mode, and accepts the
same options.  It creates an index print of thumbails, printing the image
name beneath each thumbnail.  Index mode enables certain other options, see
.Sx INDEX MODE OPTIONS .
.It Cm -I , --fullindex
Same as Index mode, but you also get image size and dimensions printed
below each thumbnail.
.It Cm -t , --thumbnails
Same as Index mode, but the thumbnails are clickable image launchers.
.It Cm --cache-thumbnails
Enable thumbnail caching in
.Pa ~/.thumbnails
(rather experimental).
.It Cm -~ , --thumb-title Ar string
Set
.Ar title
for windows opened from thumbnail mode.  See also
.Sx FORMAT SPECIFIERS .
.It Cm --index-name Ar bool
Toggle showing the filename in thumbnail/index mode.
.It Cm --index-size Ar bool
Toggle showing the filesize in thumbnail/index mode.
.It Cm --index-dim Ar bool
Toggle showing image dimensions in thumbnail/index mode.
.It Cm --bg-tile Ar file
Set
.Ar file
as desktop background, tiled if necessary.
.Nm
can use enlightenment IPC if you are running it, or it will fall back to X
methods.
.Nm
stores the commandline necessary to restore the background in
.Pa ~/.fehbg .
So to have your background restored when you restart X, add the line
.Qq `cat ~/.fehbg`
to your X startup script
.Pq e.g. Pa ~/.xinitrc .
Note that you only need to do this for non E window managers.
.It Cm --bg-center Ar file
Set
.Ar file
as centered desktop background
.It Cm --bg-scale Ar file
Set
.Ar file
as scaled desktop background.  This will fill the whole background with
.Ar file ,
but its aspect ratio will not be preserved.
.It Cm --bg-fill Ar file
Like
.Cm --bg-scale ,
but preserves aspect ratio by zooming the image until it fits.  Either a
horizontal or a vertical part of the image will be cut off.
.It Cm --bg-seamless Ar file
Like
.Cm --bg-tile ,
but with blurry corners so that it is
.Pq in some cases ;-)
less obvious that the image is too small for the screen.
.It Cm -M , --menu-font Ar font
Use
.Ar font
.Pq truetype, with size, like Qq yudit/12
as menu font.
.It Cm -C , --fontpath Ar path
Specify
.Ar path
as extra directory in which to search for fonts; can be used multiple times to
add multiple paths.
.It Cm --menu-style Ar file
Read
.Ar file
to determine menu style.
.It Cm -) , --menu-bg Ar file
Use
.Ar file
as background image in menus.
.It Cm --menu-border Ar int
Specify number of pixels that define the menu background's border.  Borders
are not stretched when images are scaled.
.It Cm -N , --no-menus
Don't load or show any menus.
.It Cm -B , --image-bg Ar style
Use style as background for transparent image parts and the like.
Accepted values: white, black, default.
.It Cm -^ , --title Ar title
Set window title for slideshow mode.
.It Cm -0 , --reload-button Ar int
Set button to reload the image
.Pq default: 0 .
.It Cm -1 , --pan-button Ar int
Set button to pan the image
.Pq hold button down and move mouse to move the image .
When the mouse is not moved, advances to the next image in slideshow mode.
.Pq default: 1 , usually the left button .
.It Cm -2 , --zoom-button Ar int
Set button to enable zoom mode
.Pq default: 2 , usually the middle button .
.It Cm -3 , --menu-button Ar int
Set button to activate the menu.
.Pq default: 3 , usually the right button .
.It Cm --menu-ctrl-mask
Require CTRL+Button for menu activation.
.It Cm -4 , --prev-button Ar int
Set button to switch to the previous image in slideshow mode
.Pq default: 4 , usually Aq mousewheel up .
.It Cm -5 , --next-button Ar int
Set button to switch to the next image in slideshow mode
.Pq default: 5 , usually Aq mousewheel down .
.It Cm -8 , --rotate-button Ar int
Use CTRL+Button to rotate the current image
.Pq default : 2 .
.It Cm --no-rotate-ctrl-mask
Don't require CTRL+Button for rotation - just use the button.
.It Cm -9 , --blur-button Ar int
Use CTRL+Button for blurring
.Pq default : 1 .
.It Cm --no-blur-ctrl-mask
Don't require CTRL+Button for blurring - just use the button.
.It Cm --no-xinerama
Disable Xinerama support.  Only makes sense when you have Xinerama support
compiled in.
.It Cm --screen-clip Ar bool
Disable/Enable screen clipping based on window size.  With this disabled,
windows may become very large, making them unmanageable in certain window
managers.
.It Cm --hide-pointer
Hide the pointer in full screen mode
.Pq useful for slideshows etc .
.El
.
.Sh MONTAGE MODE OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Cm -X , --ignore-aspect
By default, the montage thumbnails will retain their aspect ratios, while
fitting into thumb-width/-height.  This options forces them to be the size set
by
.Cm --thumb-width No and Cm --thumb-height .
This will prevent any empty space in the final montage.
.It Cm -s , --stretch
Normally, if an image is smaller than the specified thumbnail size, it will
not be enlarged.  If this option is set, the image will be scaled up to fit
the thumnail size.  Aspect ratio will be maintained unles
.Cm --ignore-aspect
is specified.
.It Cm -y , --thumb-width Ar pixels
Set thumbnail width.
.It Cm -E , --thumb-height Ar pixels
Set thumbnail height.
.It Cm -W , --limit-width Ar pixels
Limit the width of the montage.
.It Cm -H , --limit-height Ar pixels
Limit the height of the montage.  These options can be used together to define
the image size exactly, or separately.  If only one is specified, the other is
calculated from the number of files specified and the size of the thumbnails.
The default is to limit width to 800 pixels and calculate the height as
necessary.
.It Cm -b , --bg Ar file No | Cm trans
Use
.Ar file
as background for your montage.  With this option specified, the montage size
will default to the size of
.Ar file
if no size restrictions were specified.  Alternatively, if
.Ar file
is
.Qq trans ,
the background will be made transparent.
.It Cm -a , --alpha Ar int
When drawing thumbnails onto the background, set their transparency level to
.Ar int
.Pq 0 - 255 .
.It Cm -o , --output Ar file
Save the created montage to
.Ar file .
.It Cm -O , --output-only Ar file
Just save the created montage to
.Ar file
without displaying it.
.El
.
.Sh INDEX MODE OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Cm -e , --font Ar font
Set font for printing the information under each thumbnail.  Should be a
truetype font, resident in the current directory or the font directory, and
should be defined in the form fontname/points, like
.Qq myfont/12 .
.It Cm -@ , --title-font Ar font
Set font to print a title on the index, if no font is specified, no title will
be printed.
.El
.
.Sh FORMAT SPECIFIERS
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It %f
Image path/filename
.It %h
Image height
.It %l
Total number of files in filelist
.It %m
Current mode
.It %n
Image name
.It %p
Number of image pixels
.It \&%P
.Nm
.It %s
Image size in bytes
.It %t
Image format
.It %u
Number of current file
.It %w
Image width
.It %v
.Nm
version
.El
.
.Sh CONFIG FILE SYNTAX
The config file allows the naming of option groups, called themes.
If
.Pa ~/.fehrc No or Pa /etc/fehrc
exist,
.Nm
will look in them for name/options pairs.
If neither of them exist,
.Nm
will create a default one in
.Pa ~/.fehrc .
.Pp
It takes entries of the form
.Qq Ar theme options ... ,
where
.Ar theme
is the name of the entry and
.Ar options
are the options which will be applied when the theme is used.
.Pp
An example entry would be
.Qq imagemap -rVq --thumb-width 40 --thumb-height 30 .
.Pp
You cane use this theme in two ways.  Either call
.Qo
.Nm
-Timagemap *.jpg
.Qc
or create a symbolic link to
.Nm
with the name of the theme you want it to use.  So from the example above:
.Qo
ln -s `which
.Nm
` ~/bin/imagemap
.Qc .
Now just run
.Qq imagemap *.jpg
to use these options.
.Pp
You can combine these themes with commandline options.  An example .fehrc is
provided with a couple of cool example themes.
.
.Sh SLIDESHOW KEYS
The default mode is slideshow mode.  When viewing a slideshow, the following
keys may be used:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It p , P , Ao backspace Ac , Aq left
Show previous image
.It n , N , Ao space Ac , Aq right
Show next image
.It r , R
Reload current image.  Useful for webcams
.It v , V
Toggle fullscreen
.It m , M
Show menu
.It c , C
Caption entry mode.  If
.Cm --caption-path
has been specified, then this enables caption editing.  The caption at the
bottom of the screen will turn yellow and can be edited.  Hit enter to confirm
and save the caption, or escape to cancel editing
.It w , W
Change window size to fit current image size
.It h , H
Pause the slideshow
.It z , Z
Jump to a random position in the current filelist
.It a , A
Toggle actions display
.Pq see Cm --draw-actions
.It d , D
Toggle filename display
.Pq see Cm --draw-filename
.It s , S
Save the current image to a unique filename
.It f , F
Save the current filelist to a unique filename
.It < , >
In place editing - rotate the images 90 degrees (counter)clockwise.
The rotation is lossless, but may create artifacts in some image corners when
used with JPEG images.  Rotating in the reverse direction will make them go
away.  See
.Xr jpegtran 1
for more about lossless JPEG rotation
.It Aq home
Show first image
.It Aq end
Show last image
.It Aq page up
Go forward ~5% of the filelist
.It Aq page down
Go backward ~5% of the filelist
.It Aq escape
Quit the slideshow
.It + , =
Increase reload delay
.It - , _
Decrease reload delay
.It Aq delete
Remove current file from filelist
.It Aq CTRL+delete
Remove current file from filelist and delete it
.It x , X
Close current window
.It q , Q
Quit feh
.It Aq keypad left
Move the image to the lift
.It Aq keypad right
Move the image to the right
.It Aq keypad up
Move the image up
.It Aq keypad down
Move the image down
.It Aq keypad begin
Antialias the image
.It Aq keypad +
Zoom in
.It Aq keypad -
Zoom out
.It Aq keypad *
Zoom to 100%
.It Aq keypad /
Zoom to fit the window size
.El
.
.Sh MOUSE ACTIONS
When viewing an image, by default mouse button 1 pans
.Pq moves the image around
or, when only clicked, moves to the next image
.Pq slideshow mode only ;
button 2 zooms
.Po click and drag left->right to zoom in, right->left to zoom out, click once
to restore zoom to 100%
.Pc ;
and mouse button 3 opens the menu.
.Pp
CTRL+Button 1 blurs or sharpens the image
.Pq drag left to blur, right to sharpen ;
CTRL+Button 2 rotates the image around the center point.
.Pp
A note about pan and zoom modes:
In pan mode, if you reach a window border but haven't yet panned to the end of
the image,
.Nm
will warp your cursor to the opposite border so you can continue panning.
.Pp
When clicking the zoom button and immediately releasing it, the image will be
back at 100% zoom.  When clicking it and moving the mouse while holding the
button down, the zoom will be continued at the previous zoom level.  Do not let
the short snapback to 100% confuse you, it'll be removed as soon as you move
the mouse.  The zoom will always happen so that the pixel on which you entered
the zoom mode remains stationary.  So, to enlarge a specific part of an image,
click the zoom button on that part.
.
.Sh USAGE EXAMPLES
Here are some examples of useful option combinations
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It feh -r /opt/images
Recursively scan /opt/images and show all the images in a slideshow
.It feh -rSname /opt/images
Same, but sort by filename
.It feh -m /opt/images/landscapes
Create a montage from the images in /opt/images/landscapes
.It feh -Xrm -W 400 --thumb-width 30 --thumb-height 20 landscapes
Create a montage from the images in ./landscapes and all directories below it.
Limit the width of the image to 400 and make the thumbnails 30x20, ignoring
aspect ratio
.It feh -irFarial/14 -O index.jpg /opt/images
Make an index print of /opt/images and all directories below it, using 14 point
Arial to write the image info under each thumbnail.  Save the image as
index.jpg and don't display it, just exit.  Note that this even works without
a running X server
.It feh -LrSpixels /opt/images
List the images in /opt/images and all directories below, sorted by pixel
size, giving as much info as possible
.It feh -kR30 http://example.org/webcam.jpg
View a webcam, reloading every 30 seconds, saving the images in /tmp
.It feh --unloadable -r /opt/images
Print all unloadable images in /opt/images, recursively
.It feh -w /opt/images/holidays
Open each image in /opt/images/holidays in its own window
.It feh -FD5 -Sname /opt/images/presentation
Show the images in .../presentation, sorted by name, in fullscreen,
automatically change to the next image after 5 seconds
.It feh -rSwidth -A Qo mv '%f' ~/images/'%n' Qc /opt/images
View all images in /opt/images and below, sorted by width, move an image to
~/image/image_name when enter is pressed.
.El
.
.Sh BUGS
Xenarama support has a few problems, especially when not on Xinerama screen 0.
.Pp
There are probably other bugs, too.  If you find one, let me know :)
.
.Sh LICENSE
Copyright Tom Gilbert (and various contributors), 1999, 2000
.Pp
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to
deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the
rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or
sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:
.Pp
The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in
all copies of the Software and its documentation and acknowledgment shall be
given in the documentation and software packages that this Software was
used.
.Pp
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.  IN NO EVENT SHALL
THE AUTHORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER
IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN
CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
.Pp
Email bugs and feature requests to
.Aq derf@chaosdorf.de
.Pp
Original author
.Pq no longer developing :
.Aq feh_sucks@linuxbrit.co.uk
